Did we find Bettle Jersey's buddy? This
has been all over the press recently due
to a paper that was published claiming
the discovery of Beetlejurs B, the
companion star to our nearest red giant.
So, just a few words about Bett, a giant
star. In fact, a super giant. It's
classified as absolutely vast, nearly
the size of Jupiter's orbit, and it's
the top left hand corner star in my
favorite winter constellation, that of
Orion.
It is huge, 650 to 750 times the radius
of the sun, around four astronomical
units. So it would completely swallow
the whole of the inner solar system,
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, most of the
asteroids, and go almost all the way out
to Jupiter. Absolutely huge. A super
giant, quite cool on the surface,
typical of these red giant stars, 3,800
Kelvin, 2,000°
less than that of the sun. And there are
some statistics that are a little bit
vague about it still. We're not entirely
sure of the mass. It's somewhere
probably in the range 14 to 19 times
that of our sun. And going with that
uncertainty in the mass goes the
uncertainty in exactly how much power it
puts out. If it's a lower mass star and
nearer to us, then it's only 67,000
times the luminosity. And if it's more
powerful, then up to 87,000 times.
Rotates quite slowly, as you'd expect
for a very large object like this,
little bit variable in brightness. And
there was a great to-do in 2019 about it
dimming and about whether or not this
was a sign that it was coming to the end
of its life and going to explode as a
supernova. Type two core collapse
supernova. But uh to a certain extent we
could do with really knowing the mass of
this object and that would help us pin
down a lot more about it. we can
directly image the surface and this is a
picture taken by the ALMA array in
Chile. Uh it's a microwave sub
millimeter
based image. So typically fairly low
resolution but this star is so vast that
it's been able to actually capture an
image of the whole of the surface. And
you can see a certain amount of
irregularity to it as well with a bit of
a bulge on one side which is quite
significant perhaps. Now as I mentioned
in 2019 the star suddenly dropped in
brightness and images showed a sort of
dark blob on the surface there in the
top image that seemed to be moving and
the shape seemed to be changing. There
was enormous amount of excitement about
whether it was going to spectacularly
explode as a supernova. Now the data on
the lower left there is the brightness
of the star over time. And you can see
the big dip in the middle there, but
it's not that much larger as a dip than
some of the more regular drops in
brightness that you can see there. Maybe
two or three times the change in
magnitude overall.
But this story is really all about the
companion star that has been suggested
and we've been looking for this or
something like it for a very long time.
Back in 1985,
attempts were made using polarization
images and speckle interferometry which
I'll say bit more about in a moment and
these came to the conclusion that there
might be a companion but follow-up
studies really were unable to prove it.
In 2024,
analysis of the radial velocity, the
Doppler shift caused by motion towards
or motion away changing the color of the
light as the energy is subtracted or
added suggested that there was perhaps a
companion in orbit, a smallalish one.
Um, and ideas at that stage were looking
at something less massive than the sun.
possibly uh it was suggested that it
might even be a white dwarf.
But most recently, we've been looking at
this variation in the brightness and you
have the two traces here in the V and B
band. So these are essentially the green
and the extreme blue ends of the
spectrum and these are showing these
periodic variations including the big
dip that was referred to earlier. And
this seems to be
evidence of a period of around six
years. I think the figure they quote is
5.94,
but I'm going to call that six for the
moment since it's not entirely uh
regular.
So, a six-year period suggests a
companion star in an orbit of six years.
And if we assume that and we take the
estimated mass of Bettle as 18 solar
masses then we can compute that the
orbit should be at a distance of 8.6
astronomical units for the semi- major
axis of the ellipse essentially the uh
radius and
that's uh around about double the radius
of Bettle itself. Um, so how do we do
that? Well, we use Kepler's laws of
planetary motion. And this is Kepler's
third law which tells us that the square
of the orbital period P relates to the
cube of the semi- major axis the radius
A
multiplied by this uh number which is a
constant 4 pi^ 2 over k^ 2 times the
mass of the primary and the therefore
the mass of the primary and the period
are all you need to go and compute the
size of the orbit or you can go the
other way round depending on what values
you have. Well, in this case, we have a
six-year period and I'm going to be very
cunning here and work in astronomical
units, years, and solar masses because
if I do that, then the Earth is 1 AU.
That's the Earth's sun distance by
definition. And the orbit is one year
also by definition. And so p is 1 and a
is 1. And therefore whatever the value
of 4<unk>i^ 2 k^ 2 over m tot the the
mass of the sun is comes out to one. So
all of that constant is just one.
But for bettle the mass would be 18
solar masses. So I just have to divide
by 18 to allow for that. So if I do that
then I get the distance cubed / 18 is
equal to the square of the period. So
that's 6^ squ.
So doing a little bit of maths d cubed
is 36. That's 6^ 2 * the 18 gives me
648.
And I use my calculator to take the cube
root and get a value for the distance of
8.6 astronomical units. So
that tells us the uh value that we
should expect.
We can also go a little bit further. If
we assume that the companion star is the
same age as Beetlej which we believe to
be about 10 million years
then stellar models of evolution of
stars during their formation phase and
their progress towards kicking off
hydrogen fusion so-called main sequence
phase
suggest that this should be a proto star
around about 1.6 six solar masses with a
temperature of about 7,400
Kelvin. So a uh white colored star
perhaps, but not yet fully on the main
sequence. 10 million years is not old
enough for a star of this mass to have
fully formed and initiated that uh
nuclear fusion process. But it must be
said there are other studies
particularly from the early speckled
interpherometry and the radial velocity
methods and the phototo polarization
ideas that are giving figures that are
lower around about 6 of a solar mass
perhaps is the lowest figure and that
might indicate a white dwarf though
others have been up to two solar masses
and it's also suggested a closer orbit
maybe as low as six astron astronomical
units although I think I saw somebody
say four but I think that's actually the
radius of Beetlejurs itself
but even at 6 AU it's likely to be
swallowed up soon because the edge of
these red super giant stars is not a
hard cutff
material extends well out beyond and
there's a lot of solar wind and mass
loss going on and so anything orbiting
in a close orbit even at 8.6 6 AU is
likely to be inside the
somewhat denser regions of all of this
material and getting frictional drag and
therefore spiraling inwards. As I say,
some have suggested that the orbit is
even smaller and uh might even be
orbiting inside the photosphere of the
star itself. Um, and maybe that blob on
the side of the image by Elma was a clue
to the fact that this is a very, very
close orbit indeed.
So, what has been determined in this new
paper? Well, I used data from the Gemini
8.1 m telescope shown in this lovely
photograph here of the Mountaintop
Observatory with this technique called
speckle interpherometry.
And this is somewhat technical, but
essentially it's a way of freezing out
the
rapid distortions caused by the motion
of the Earth's atmosphere. Essentially,
the twinkling of the star. The
turbulence and uh be bending of light
caused by the differences in density as
the air is moving around tends to bend
and split the beams of light into the
sorts of patterns on the right hand side
which should all resolve to a single
dot. But the
light is spread out and imaged in
multiple individual
tiny dots. Each one of those is actually
probably a quite good image of the star
itself. And what we're getting is a
whole lot of different images all
overlaid on top of each other. And
speckle interpherometry works by taking
many many images like this at very very
rapid rate to try and freeze out any
motion blur and then use spectral
analysis in a computer. lots of fur
transforms to try to determine what the
image of the star that was being
distorted is. And in this case, the team
did two runs each of 6,000 images. The
first at 10 milliseconds per frame, so
100 frames per second, and the second at
a slightly longer 60 frames per second
in order to get slightly brighter data.
And uh then they used both of those in
the computer analysis. And I want to
show you what the real results of that
were like before I show you the uh
artist constructed images that are going
around the internet a lot. So here's the
real picture. The star Beetlejurs is the
region in the center
and we have
the arrow indicating the companion star
that dot to the lower left the eastern
side of the image and battle jersey is
showing as around 41 mill arc seconds.
So 0.0
41 of an arcsec.
But as you can see it's not a sharp
cutff. It's brighter in the center.
Obviously is a negative image with the
dark being the most intense regions. And
there's a drop off towards the outside.
Um followed by the somewhat more intense
blob of the supposed companion which is
at a distance of 52 millconds.
Now, that would put it inside the
envelope of Beetlejurs, which goes all
the way out to 135. So, it is likely to
be in one of these spiraling in orbits
and probably only has about 10,000 years
before the drag will have caused its
orbit to decay. But I am going to draw
your attention to the other side of the
diagram, not the one indicated by the
arrow, but the other even darker black
dot and ask the question, what's that?
And that's quite interesting because we
are identifying one of these dots as the
companion and not the other one. So
what's going on? Well, from this data
and uh using computer processing, you
can actually extract an image such as
the one in the top there with the orange
of Beetlejurs and the blue fuzzy blob of
the companion star. And I've shown the
inset against the constellation of Orion
indicating where Bett is there.
Now, in terms of the amount of light,
this is 250 times fainter than Betty
itself. So for something that's only a
quarter of Beetlejurs's diameter
separated between the photosphere of
Beetlej and the image itself and is 250
times fainter, you can see why this
would be very very difficult. But
amazingly, it is right where the
predictions based on speckle and radial
velocity methods indicated it would be
right at the correct distance and the
correct position angle of 115° on the uh
360° rotational face there. So exactly
where it was predicted from the uh
radial velocity studies. However, even
the authors of the original paper say
that this is a 1.6 sigma detection and
more work is needed. So that means that
the
statistics of the discovery show
something that's 1.6 standard deviations
from the mean. Now, normally
three, and I'd start to believe it. In
particle physics, they want five sigma
to claim a discovery so that you're 99%
sure that you've uh got yourself a
detection. And at 1.6, it's probably
more likely than it is unlikely, but
only just really that this is a
detection. So, it's a little bit
tentative at this point. So, we have to
look to see what else might be causing
it and try and rule out some other
possibilities.
And at the top here are two images. One
from February
2017 and one from December uh uh of
2009.
Sorry, December of 2024, the 9th.
Getting that wrong. And you can see that
the image has changed. In the lefthand
2017 image, we have a ring of bright
material kind of showing around the
central region, which may or may not be
an artifact of the processing. It's hard
to tell, but it's changed in the image
from 2024.
We have a bluish blob to the left
indicated by the arrow where the
companion is, but again, there is that
bluish blob to the right as well. And so
it's going to be difficult to be sure
here. Now, the good news is that by
looking at this, that darker blob wasn't
there before and is there now. And so if
you consider the fact that Beetlej is
moving slowly against the background of
even more distant stars, it's so-called
proper motion. then whatever is uh in
the image now was not in a different
position earlier.
I'll say that again just to be clear.
These these blobs are apparently missing
in the first image. And so that and I'm
not talking about just in the same
place, but they're not in any of the
rest of the image either. And so they
aren't background stars or indeed
objects in the foreground because the
proper motion would most certainly have
been different. Uh so they are more
likely to have been in orbit around and
traveling with Bettle. That's the uh
explanation that's given for this here.
Now what it's really begging for is more
data before we can confirm this. I want
to see the other blob eliminated as
being another cloud of gas orbiting
around. I want to see this confirmed as
being a star rather than a blob. And
it's entirely plausible that there could
be large blobs of gas going around uh
battleers as well.
So remaining questions. Well, we only
imaged it with one color filter. So we
have good data in the green part of the
spectrum, but really you could do with
looking at it with other color filters
to try to see if the brightness is there
in those parts of the spectrum as well.
That would help us be able to identify
its temperature from the black body
radiation curve uh max plank theory. And
ideally, we would love to be able to get
its spectrum again because the spectrum
would tell us the temperature and it
would also allow us to classify it. Is
it a white dwarf? Is it a main sequence
B type star or A type star? Is it still
a protoar? Or indeed, is it actually a
large somewhat more diffuse cloud of gas
and dust? We don't know really that 1.6
six sigma detection is not really
cutting the mustard at this point. It
would be great with follow-up
observations, assuming it is a companion
star to pin down the orbit. If we could
find the orbital distance, then we could
plug that back in and reverse calculate
the mass of Bett because the orbital
calculation of 8.6 six astronomical
units assumes the mass of Bettleges is
18 solar masses and we've got one data
point for the distance of uh what was it
millarch seconds rather than the radius
of Beetlej being uh 41 and getting some
other numbers on that we would be able
to try to evaluate the orbit. If we
could pin down the mass of bettes from
this, then we could pin down its
temperature, its brightness, its power
output um in all the different parts of
the spectrum from our stellar models and
indeed the distance of beters from the
sun would all be known so much more
accurately. And if you want to hear more
about that, well, I have another video
entitled Bettleers. Will it supernova
tomorrow? And that's been very popular
because it discusses the pos possibility
of a companion at a time when we didn't
know the uh latest results that have
come through and talks to the fact that
we don't know how far away Bettle is or
what its mass is or whether or not it's
going to explode as a supernova now,
tomorrow, in a million years or indeed
ever because there is quite some uh
evidence that battle might be a lot
closer and a lot less massive than some
of these assumptions that are being made
here. So, a fascinating story and I
can't wait to find the answer, but I
thought I'd just uh give you this little
update about the companion star. And uh
with that, I'll leave you with the image
of it, which I think is great. It even
shows that little bulge on the side of
Beetlej pointing towards it. Maybe
that's the gravity of it pulling the uh
material off the photo sphere towards
it. We just don't know. at this point
and I can't wait to find out. Thanks
very much for listening and I'll see you
on the next one.